>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, MARCH 28:
NEW REVELATIONS ABOUT THE PILOT
WHO AUTHORITIES SAY DELIBERATELY
CRASHED A JETLINER INTO THE
ALPS.
WE'LL HAVE A REPORT FROM
GERMANY.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT: THE
CONVERSATION.
DOCTORS AND PATIENTS GETTING
PAST THE POLITICS TO TALK ABOUT
END-OF-LIFE DECISIONS.
>> FROM "KEEP ME ALIVE, NO
MATTER WHAT, AS LONG AS MEDICINE
CAN DO THAT," TO "I JUST WANT TO
BE HOME WITH MY FAMILY, WITH
HOSPICE."
>> Sreenivasan: AND FROM HERE IN
SAN FRANCISCO, A NOVEL PLAN TO
HELP YOUNG PEOPLE DISCOVER
CLASSICAL MUSIC.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM KQED IN SAN FRANCISCO,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WHILE DEFINITIVE ANSWERS REMAIN
ELUSIVE, NEW INFORMATION EMERGED
TODAY ABOUT THE YOUNG CO-PILOT
WHO AUTHORITIES BELIEVE
DELIBERATELY FLEW A GERMANWINGS
AIRBUS INTO THE SIDE OF A
MOUNTAIN IN THE ALPS.
ALL 150 PEOPLE ON BOARD WERE
KILLED.
FOR THE LATEST, WE ARE JOINED BY
JACK EWING OF THE NEW YORK
TIMES.
HE JOINS US TONIGHT VIA SKYPE
FROM MONTABAUR GERMANY WHERE THE
COPILOT WAS FROM.
SO WHAT DO WE KNOW TODAY?
>> GOOD AFTERNOON.
THE LATEST, AS MY COLLEAGUE IN
PARIS HAS DETERMINED, HE HAD
SOUGHT TREATMENT FOR VISION
PROBLEMS SOME TIME BEFORE THE
CRASH.
SO THAT SUGGEST THAT'S PERHAPS
HIS ABILITY TO FLY WAS IN
QUESTION, AND PERHAPS GIVES US
SOME IDEA WHAT HIS MOTIVATION
MIGHT HAVE BEEN.
AND HE HAD CONCEALED THIS FROM
HIS EMPLOYER.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WE'VE GOT
THESE REPORTS THAT PERHAPS HIS
LONG-TERM RELATIONSHIP ENDED
JUST THE DAY BEFORE THIS CRASH?
>> I'VE SEEN THAT SPECULATION.
I HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO CONFIRM
IT MYSELF.
WE KNOW HE HAD A GIRLFRIEND.
WHAT THE STATUS OF THE
RELATIONSHIP WAS, WHETHER THERE
WAS ANY PROBLEMS, I HAVEN'T BEEN
ABLE TO DETERMINE THAT WITH
CERTAINTY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THE
DOCTORS' NOTES THAT HE HAD, DID
THAT INCLUDE THE DAY OF THIS
CRASH?
I MEAN, WAS HE BASICALLY
SUPPOSED TO STAY HOME OR HAD AN
EXCUSE TO STAY HOME FROM THE
DOCTOR FOR WHATEVER THE MEDICAL
REASON WAS?
>> YEAH, THAT'S MY
UNDERSTANDING, AND, IN GERMANY,
THE WAY THE SYSTEM WORKS IS,
IF YOUR DOCTOR GIVES YOU ONE
OF THESE CERTIFICATES, YOU'RE
SUPPOSED TO STAY HOME.
YOU'RE OBLIGATED TO STAY HOME
AND YOU SHOULD INFORM YOUR
EMPLOYER ABOUT THAT AND IT SEEMS
HE DID NOT DO THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE WAS ALSO
A REPORT TODAY THAT THE
GIRLFRIEND HAD SAID HE AT SOME
POINTS WOKE UP IN THE MIDDLE OF
THE NIGHT AND SAID, "ONE DAY
I'LL DO SOMETHING.
MY NAME WILL BE KNOWN FOREVER."
>> THIS IS COMING FROM WHAT IS
CALLED THE BILD SITE, A GERMAN
TABLOID NEWSPAPER.
I WOULD TAKE THAT WITH A GRAIN
OF SALT.
THEY DON'T SAY WHO THIS PERSON
IS AND WE HAVE NO WAY OF REALLY
KNOWING HOW CREDIBLE THAT
ACCOUNT IS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S THE
STATE OF THE INVESTIGATION NOW?
>> WELL, I THINK THE-- BOTH THE
FRENCH AND THE GERMAN
AUTHORITIES ARE GOING THROUGH
MATERIAL THAT THEY'VE SEIZED
FROM HIS APARTMENT IN
DUSSELDORF, AND, APPARENTLY,
ALSO FROM HIS PARENTS' HOUSE
HERE IN MONTABAUR, AND THEY'RE
TRYING TO DETERMINE WHAT HIS
MOTIVATION MIGHT HAVE BEEN,
WHAT-- WHEN HE KNEW ABOUT THESE
CONDITIONS THAT HE HAD, AND HOW
MUCH HE HAD TOLD THE GERMANWINGS
AND LUFTHANSA, HIS EMPLOYERS.
SO THEY'RE JUST TRYING TO
DETERMINE THE WHOLE SEQUENCE OF
THINGS AND FIND OUT HOW MUCH AS
THEY CAN ABOUT WHY HE MIGHT HAVE
DONE THIS TERRIBLE THING.
>> Sreenivasan: JACK, YOU'VE
BEEN LOOKING INTO THE LIFE OF
THIS COPILOT.
WHAT MORE YOU HAVE LEARNED?
>> WELL, THE ONE THING THAT YOU
GET OVER AND OVER AGAIN WHEN YOU
TALK TO PEOPLE ABOUT HIM IS THEY
SAY HE SEEMED VERY NORMAL.
HE WAS FRIENDLY.
HE FIT IN PRETTY WELL.
HE WASN'T A LONER.
AT THE SAME TIME, HE WAS PRETTY
RESERVED.
HE WASN'T SOMEBODY THAT STOOD
OUT.
AND YOU KEEP HEARING THAT OVER
AND OVER AGAIN, THAT HE WAS VERY
NORMAL.
THE ONE THING THAT STOOD OUT WAS
THAT HE EXTREMELY PASSIONATE
ABOUT FLYING.
THAT WAS REALLY HIS BIG THING.
AND HE STARTED WHEN HE WAS 14
HERE, LEARNING HOW TO FLY A
GLIDER.
I TALKED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE
GLIDER CLUB TODAY AND ALL THEY
REMEMBERED WAS HE WAS VERY
MOTIVATED TO FLY AND THEY HAD NO
INKLING THAT ANYTHING LIKE
THIS WOULD EVER HAPPEN.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
JACK EWING OF THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" JOINING US VIA SKYPE
FROM MONTABAUR, GERMANY, WHERE
THE CO-PILOT WAS FROM, THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Sreenivasan: LEADERS OF 21
NATIONS FROM THE ARAB LEAGUE
GATHERED TODAY IN AN EGYPTIAN
RESORT TOWN TO CONSIDER WHETHER
TO CREATE A JOINT ARAB MILITARY
FORCE TO COUNTER PRO-IRANIAN
REBELS IN YEMEN.
SAUDI ARABIA CONTINUED AIR
STRIKES ON THE REBELS FOR A
THIRD CONSECUTIVE DAY.
DOZENS OF CIVILIANS REPORTEDLY
HAVE BEEN KILLED.
THE FIGHTING IN YEMEN IS SEEN AS
A PROXY WAR BETWEEN SUNNI MUSLIM
NATIONS, LIKE SAUDI ARABIA, AND
SHIITE MUSLIM NATIONS LIKE IRAN.
AMERICAN OFFICIALS HAVE SAID THE
CONFLICT IN YEMEN UNDERMINES
THEIR EFFORTS TO CONTAIN AL
QAEDA.
ITS MEMBERS THERE TOOK
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE TERROR
ATTACKS IN PARIS IN JANUARY.
IN SOMALIA, OFFICIALS SAID TODAY
THEY HAVE REGAINED FULL CONTROL
OF A HOTEL IN THE CAPITAL CITY
OF MOGADISHU THAT HAD BEEN
ATTACKED BY ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS.
AT LEAST 20 PEOPLE WERE KILLED,
INCLUDING A SOMALI DIPLOMAT TO
THE UNITED NATIONS.
THE MILITANT GROUP, AL-SHABAB,
CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
ATTACK, WHICH BEGAN WITH A CAR
BOMB, FOLLOWED BY ARMED GUNMEN
STORMING THE HOTEL BUILDING.
SIX GUNMEN WERE AMONG THOSE
KILLED.
THE AL-SHABAB EXTREMISTS, WHO
ARE LINKED TO AL-QAEDA, HAVE
BEEN WAGING SIMILAR ATTACKS
AGAINST CIVILIAN TARGETS AND THE
SOMALI GOVERNMENT SINCE 2006.
AMERICAN ASTRONAUT SCOTT KELLY
AND TWO RUSSIAN COSMONAUTS
ARRIVED AT THE INTERNATIONAL
SPACE STATION LAST NIGHT, FOR A
NEARLY A YEAR-LONG SPACE
MISSION, THE LONGEST EVER BY AN
AMERICAN ASTRONAUT.
KELLY AND THE OTHERS WILL
UNDERGO EXTENSIVE MEDICAL TESTS
TO SEE HOW THEY REACT TO SUCH A
LONG TRIP.
KELLY'S TWIN BROTHER, RETIRED
ASTRONAUT MARK KELLY, ON THE
LEFT, WILL UNDERGO SIMILAR TESTS
WHILE ON EARTH SO NASA CAN
COMPARE HOW TWO IDENTICAL HUMANS
RESPOND TO DIFFERENT CONDITIONS.
THE REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR OF
ARKANSAS, ASA HUTCHINSON, SAYS
HE WILL SIGN A BILL, ALLOWING
BUSINESSES THERE NOT TO PROVIDE
SERVICES TO GROUPS WHOSE
LIFESTYLE VIOLATE THE OWNER'S
RELIGIOUS BELIEFS.
FOR INSTANCE, A BAKERY NOT
HAVING TO MAKE A CAKE FOR A
SAME-SEX WEDDING.
PROPONENTS SAY THE MEASURE
UPHOLDS RELIGIOUS FREEDOM.
OPPONENTS SAY IT FOSTERS
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST
HOMOSEXUALS.
INDIANA PASSED A SIMILAR LAW
EARLIER THIS WEEK.
SEVERAL CORPORATE LEADERS HAVE
CRITICIZED THE LEGISLATION, NOW
ON THE BOOKS IN 19 STATES.
IN COLORADO, A JUDGE HAS
DISMISSED A LAWSUIT TO HOLD
AMMUNITION RETAILERS LIABLE FOR
THE 2012 AURORA MOVIE THEATER
SHOOTING THAT LEFT 12 PEOPLE
DEAD.
PARENTS OF ONE OF THE SHOOTING
VICTIMS HAD SUED FOUR AMMO
DEALERS CHARGING THAT THEY SOLD
BULLETS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT TO
ALLEGED SHOOTER JAMES HOLMES
WITHOUT FULLY SCREENING HIM.
IN HIS RULING YESTERDAY, THE
JUDGE SAID, THE PLAINTIFFS
FAILED TO PROVE NEGLIGENCE ON
THE PART OF THE RETAILERS.
HOLMES FACES TRIAL NEXT MONTH.
THE PROSECUTORS ARE SEEKING THE
DEATH PENALTY.
HE HAS PLEADED NOT GUILTY BY
REASON OF INSANITY.
A NEW STUDY SUGGESTS THAT
AEROBIC EXERCISE COULD CHANGE
THE BIOLOGY OF MALIGNANT TUMORS
AND MAKE CHEMOTHERAPY MORE
EFFECTIVE.
THE IDEA IS THAT EXERCISE
CREATES OXYGEN-RICH BLOOD
VESSELS THAT CAN WRAP AROUND
BLOOD VESSELS FEEDING THE TUMOR,
ESSENTIALLY STARVING IT.
THE STUDY, DONE ON MICE AT DUKE,
MASS GENERAL AND MEMORIAL SLOAN
KETTERING, WAS PUBLISHED IN THE
"JOURNAL OF THE NATIONAL CANCER
INSTITUTE."
ADDITIONAL TESTS ARE UNDER WAY
TO HELP DETERMINE ITS
IMPLICATIONS FOR HUMANS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
THERE'S A NEW MOVEMENT TO
ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO THINK AND
TALK ABOUT DEATH, LONG BEFORE IT
HAPPENS, BUT IT'S NOT AS DARK AS
IT SOUNDS, ITS ALSO CREATING AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR FAMILIES TO TALK
ABOUT LIFE, AND HOW PEOPLE WISH
TO LIVE IT NEAR THE END.
IT ALL BEGINS WITH A SIMPLE
CONVERSATION.
OUR REPORT IS BY NEWSHOUR
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT LYNN
SHERR.
>> WHAT'S THE MATTER, MAMA?
>> I'M DYING, FORREST.
>> Reporter: IT'S BEEN A
HOLLYWOOD STAPLE FOR DECADES:
THE DEATHBED SCENE.
HERE, FORREST GUMP'S MOM
REMINDING HER SON THAT DEATH IS
A NATURAL PART OF LIFE.
BUT WHEN END-OF-LIFE
CONVERSATIONS WITH DOCTORS WERE
ENCOURAGED BY THE GOVERNMENT
BACK IN 2009 DURING THE
OBAMACARE DEBATE, OPPONENTS
CALLED THEM "DEATH PANELS" AND
THE IDEA BECAME TOXIC.
SOME CALLED IT "PULLING THE PLUG
ON GRANDMA."
THAT WAS THEN.
>> IT IS EXACTLY THE OPPOSITE.
IT IS ABOUT GRANDMA CONTROLLING
THE PLUG.
>> Reporter: DR. LACHLAN FORROW,
A SPECIALIST IN ETHICS AND
PALLIATIVE CARE AT BOSTON'S BETH
ISRAEL DEACONESS MEDICAL CENTER,
IS AT THE FOREFRONT OF A NEW
NATIONAL MOVEMENT TO MAKE
TALKING ABOUT DEATH PUBLIC
POLICY.
HE CHAIRED THE EXPERT MEDICAL
PANEL THAT HELPED LEAD TO NEW
MASSACHUSETTS REGULATIONS-- THE
FIRST IN THE NATION, WHICH TOOK
EFFECT IN DECEMBER-- MANDATING
THAT HEALTH FACILITIES FROM
HOSPITALS TO ASSISTED LIVING
COMMUNITIES TELL TERMINALLY ILL
PATIENTS THEIR END-OF-LIFE
OPTIONS.
>> THE FULL RANGE OF THE
CHOICES, FROM "KEEP ME ALIVE, NO
MATTER WHAT, AS LONG AS MEDICINE
CAN DO THAT," TO "I JUST WANT TO
BE HOME WITH MY FAMILY, WITH
HOSPICE," TO ANYTHING IN BETWEEN
OR ANY SEQUENCE.
>> Reporter: NATIONALLY, A
NUMBER OF PRIVATE INSURERS ARE
ALREADY REIMBURSING DOCTORS FOR
HAVING THOSE TALKS.
AMONG THE CRITICAL FIRST STEPS:
AN ADVANCE DIRECTIVE AND A
HEALTH CARE PROXY SO SOMEONE YOU
TRUST CAN LEGALLY MAKE DECISIONS
IF YOU'RE INCAPACITATED.
AND ALMOST SIX YEARS AFTER THE
OBAMACARE PROPOSAL PERISHED IN
THE POLITICAL GRAVEYARD,
MEDICARE IS NOW REVIEWING THE
POSSIBILITY OF PAYING FOR SUCH
DISCUSSIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ENDORSED BY THE AMERICAN MEDICAL
ASSOCIATION.
A DECISION COULD COME BY THE END
OF THIS YEAR.
>> WE ARE JUST STARTING TO
EMERGE SO THAT POLITICIANS AND
OTHERS REALIZE THIS IS NOT THE
THIRD RAIL OF POLITICS.
>> Reporter: BUT ADVOCATES SAY
POLICY DOESN'T CHANGE UNTIL THE
CULTURE DOES, AND INSERTING SUCH
PRIVATE CONVERSATIONS INTO THE
PUBLIC ARENA MAY REQUIRE A NEW
APPROACH.
>> SOMETIMES PEOPLE THINK YOU
TALK ABOUT DYING AND YOU LET IT
INTO THE ROOM.
>> Reporter: PULITZER-PRIZE
WINNING JOURNALIST ELLEN GOODMAN
IS ON A MISSION TO MAKE DEATH
PART OF POPULAR CONVERSATION.
FOR MORE THAN 35 YEARS, SHE
CHRONICLED AMERICAN SOCIAL
CHANGE IN HER WIDELY SYNDICATED
COLUMNS FOR THE "BOSTON GLOBE."
SHE WROTE ABOUT THE VALUES
INSTILLED IN HER AS A CHILD BY
HER FATHER, WHO HELPED RUN JOHN
F. KENNEDY'S FIRST SENATE
CAMPAIGN, AND HER HOMEMAKER
MOTHER, EDITH.
BUT GOODMAN ONLY REALIZED THE
CONSEQUENCES OF LEAVING CERTAIN
THINGS UNSAID ABOUT A DOZEN
YEARS AGO, WHEN HER MOTHER'S
HEALTH STARTED TO FAIL.
>> I THINK WE ALL HAVE THIS
FANTASY THAT WE'RE GOING TO LIVE
TO 90, AND THENKABOOM,YOU
KNOW?
BUT, IN FACT, THE REALITY IS
THAT MANY OF US WILL FACE A LONG
PERIOD OF BEING FRAIL AND
DECLINING.
AND I WOULD SAY THAT MY MOTHER
BEGAN TO DECLINE SOMEWHERE IN
HER 80s, REALLY.
>> Reporter: AFTER HER MOTHER
MOVED TO A LONG-TERM CARE
FACILITY A FEW MILES AWAY,
GOODMAN FOUND HERSELF MAKING
MEDICAL DECISIONS SHE HADN'T
DREAMED OF, ESPECIALLY BECAUSE
EDITH BEGAN TO SUFFER FROM
DEMENTIA.
>> MY MOTHER COULD REALLY NO
LONGER DECIDE WHAT SHE WANTED
FOR LUNCH, LET ALONE WHAT SHE
WANTED FOR HEALTH CARE
DECISIONS.
SO, I WAS FACED WITH A KIND OF
CASCADING NUMBER OF DECISIONS
FOR WHICH I WAS UNPREPARED.
IN FACT, BLINDSIDED.
>> AND I REMEMBER PARTICULARLY
ONE DAY WHEN I GOT A CALL ON THE
PHONE AND I WAS ON DEADLINE.
AND THE DOCTOR SAID TO ME, "YOUR
MOTHER HAS ANOTHER BOUT OF
PNEUMONIA.
DO YOU WANT HER TO HAVE
ANTIBIOTICS?"
AND I REMEMBER MY HANDS BEING
POISED OVER THE KEYBOARD,
SAYING, "WHAT IS HE ASKING ME?
IS HE ASKING ME DO I WANT HER TO
LIVE OR DIE?
YOU KNOW, CAN I CALL YOU BACK?
COULD I HAVE A MINUTE?"
AND SO, IT WAS QUITE SHOCKING TO
ME THAT THOSE DECISIONS FELL TO
ME.
I'D JUST NEVER THOUGHT ABOUT IT
BEFORE.
>> Reporter: WHAT YOU'RE SAYING
IS, YOU NEVER TALKED TO HER
ABOUT THESE THINGS AHEAD OF
TIME?
>> WELL, WE DIDN'T TALK IN A WAY
THAT WAS USEFUL.
FROM TIME TO TIME, IF WE WERE
TOGETHER, MY MOTHER WOULD SAY,
"I NEVER WANT TO BE LIKE THAT.
PULL THE PLUG."
YOU KNOW, A LOT OF PEOPLE SAY
THAT.
WELL, THERE'S GENERALLY NO PLUG
TO PULL.
>> Reporter: EDITH HOLTZ DIED AT
92 IN 2006.
FOUR YEARS LATER, GOODMAN CO-
FOUNDED THE CONVERSATION
PROJECT, A NON-PROFIT TO URGE
PEOPLE TO EXPRESS THEIR END-OF-
LIFE DESIRES, TO HAVE THE
CONVERSATION WITH THOSE CLOSE TO
THEM EARLY ON BEFORE IT'S TOO
LATE.
ADVISED BY A GROUP OF HEALTHCARE
PROFESSIONALS INCLUDING DR.
FORROW, ITS WEB SITE HAS
ATTRACTED ALMOST A QUARTER
MILLION VISITORS.
MORE THAN HALF HAVE DOWNLOADED
THE STARTER KIT, A KIND OF
SECURITY BLANKET TO JUMP START
THE PROCESS.
WHEN YOU DOWNLOAD THE KIT,
YOU'LL FIND PLENTY OF USEFUL AND
PRACTICAL ADVICE ON HOW TO GET
AN OTHERWISE UNCOMFORTABLE
DISCUSSION GOING.
FOR OPENERS, YOU ARE ASKED TO
COMPLETE THE FOLLOWING SENTENCE:
"WHAT MATTERS TO ME AT THE END
OF LIFE IS..."
YOU'RE ALSO INVITED TO CONSIDER
WHERE YOU WANT TO HAVE THE
CONVERSATION, WITH WHOM AND
WHERE.
AND THERE ARE SUGGESTIONS OF THE
ACTUAL WORDS YOU CAN USE TO
BREAK THE ICE.
FOR INSTANCE, "I NEED TO THINK
ABOUT THE FUTURE.
WILL YOU HELP ME?"
>> WE TALKED ABOUT NURSING HOMES
AND, YOU KNOW, LIVING AT HOME.
WE TALKED ABOUT PAIN MANAGEMENT.
WE TALKED ABOUT ALL KINDS OF
ISSUES THAT WE WOULDN'T
OTHERWISE HAVE EVER TALKED ABOUT
UNTIL THE TIME WAS UPON US.
>> Reporter: HUSBAND AND WIFE
CHUCK KOPLIK AND SUE TAFLER OF
LEXINGTON, MASSACHUSETTS,
RECENTLY HAD THE CONVERSATION
WITH THEIR ONLY CHILD, SARAH
YUKICH.
INSPIRED BY A WORKSHOP ON THE
CONVERSATION PROJECT AT THEIR
SYNAGOGUE, CHUCK AND SUE-- IN
THEIR 60s AND IN GOOD HEALTH
EXCEPT FOR RECENT SURGERY ON
SUE'S FOOT-- SAT DOWN HERE IN
THEIR LIVING ROOM.
THEY WERE MOST CONCERNED ABOUT
THE EFFECT ON SARAH.
>> I COULD JUST TELL I WAS
UNSETTLING HER, SO THAT WAS
DIFFICULT.
>> I'M 32.
I HAVE A TWO-YEAR-OLD.
I'M AN ADULT, AND I KNOW THAT.
BUT, AT THE SAME TIME
INTERACTING WITH MY PARENTS, I'M
THEIR CHILD; I'M NOT THEIR
CARETAKER.
AND TRYING TO THINK ABOUT THAT
EVENTUAL ROLE REVERSAL IS VERY
SCARY.
>> Reporter: SO, WHEN THEY
SUGGESTED HAVING THE
CONVERSATION, YOUR FIRST
REACTION WAS...
>> I WAS HAPPY THAT THEY WERE
SUGGESTING IT BECAUSE IT'S
SOMETHING THAT I HAVE WANTED TO
TALK TO THEM ABOUT, BUT I DIDN'T
REALLY HAVE ANY IDEA OF HOW TO
BRING IT UP.
>> Reporter: SARAH SAYS SHE WAS
ESPECIALLY RELIEVED WHEN THEY
SAID THAT MOVING THEM TO
MARYLAND, WHERE SHE LIVES, FOR
LONG-TERM CARE WOULD BE
ACCEPTABLE.
>> IT WAS LIKE, 'OH, OKAY."
SO, NOW, I DON'T HAVE TO BE SORT
OF HOLDING THAT INSIDE BUT NOT
REALLY KNOWING HOW TO BRING IT
UP.
>> Reporter: WAS THIS ABOUT
GAINING CONTROL OVER THE END OF
YOUR LIFE?
>> YEAH.
I THINK IN SOME WAYS IT KIND OF
GIVES ME A LITTLE BIT OF A SENSE
OF CONTROL AND SORT OF STARTING
TO THINK ABOUT IT.
>> YEAH, ONE OF MY BIGGEST FEARS
WOULD BE THAT I'D BE IN PAIN.
OR MAYBE I WASN'T SO
CLEARHEADED AND THE DOCTORS
WOULD BE MAKING DECISIONS ON
WHAT MY TREATMENT WOULD BE, AND
THEN THEY'D BE MAKING THE
DECISIONS.
>> Reporter: INDIVIDUALS-- NOT
MEDICAL STAFF-- SHOULD
DETERMINE THOSE ISSUES, SAYS
THE CONVERSATION PROJECT.
ACCORDING TO A SURVEY THE GROUP
CONDUCTED, MORE THAN 90% OF
PEOPLE AGREE, SAYING THEY
SHOULD HAVE THE CONVERSATION.
BUT ONLY 30% HAVE DONE SO, WHICH
IS WHY THEY'RE EXPANDING THEIR
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT CAMPAIGN.
GOODMAN HERSELF, WHO USED TO
COVER SOCIAL CHANGE AND ITS
INFLUENCE ON OUR INSTITUTIONS,
NOW MAKES IT HAPPEN.
>> LET ME SHOW YOU STATISTICS.
70% OF AMERICANS SAY THEY WANT
TO DIE AT HOME, AND 70% OF
AMERICANS ARE DYING IN HOSPITALS
AND INSTITUTIONS.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE CO-
SPONSORING "DEATH OVER DINNER"
PARTIES-- SOCIAL GATHERINGS TO
APPROACH THE SUBJECT IN A COZY
SETTING SO PEOPLE CAN BREAK
BREAD WHILE BREAKING THE TABOO.
THEY'VE ALSO HAD SOME LUCK
CONVINCING TV WRITERS TO INCLUDE
FAMILY CONVERSATIONS ABOUT DEATH
IN THEIR SCRIPTS.
>> IT WAS A DECISION WE MADE
TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: IT'S ALL ABOUT
MAKING THE SUBJECT SAFE,
BRINGING IT HOME, BECAUSE, THE
CONVERSATION PROJECT SAYS,
NOTHING WILL CHANGE UNTIL PEOPLE
START TALKING ABOUT IT.
YOU HAVE KIDS, YOU HAVE
GRANDKIDS, YOU HAVE A HUSBAND.
HAVE YOU HAD THE CONVERSATION?
>> OH, YES.
MY DAUGHTER'S A COMEDIAN, AND
HER FIRST RESPONSE WHEN I SAID,
"LET'S HAVE THIS CONVERSATION,"
WAS, "CAN'T WE HAVE LUNCH?"
BUT WE DID GET THROUGH IT, WE
DID TALK ABOUT IT, AND I HAVE
TALKED ABOUT IT WITH MY HUSBAND
AND WITH MOST OF THE PEOPLE IN
MY FAMILY.
PEOPLE, WHEN THEY HAVE THESE
CONVERSATIONS WITH EACH OTHER,
DESCRIBE THEM AS SOME OF THE
RICHEST PERSONAL MOMENTS THEY'VE
HAD WITH PEOPLE THEY LOVE.
SOMEONE DESCRIBED HAVING THE
CONVERSATION TO US AS A GIFT.
IT'S A GIFT YOU GIVE YOUR
FAMILY.
>> Sreenivasan: A CONVERSATION
ON THE CONVERSATION WILL HAPPEN
ONLINE, THURSDAY ON TWITTER,
FROM 1:00-2:00 P.M. EASTERN.
JOIN REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE
CONVERSATION PROJECT AND PBS
FRONTLINE.
FOLLOW ALONG AT #NEWSHOURCHATS.
AND NOW TO THE ARTS, AND NEW
EFFORTS TO HELP YOUNG PEOPLE
DISCOVER CLASSICAL MUSIC.
A GROUP KNOWN AS "AMERICANS FOR
THE ARTS" ESTIMATES THAT
ATTENDANCE AT PERFORMANCES BY
SYMPHONY ORCHESTRAS HAS DECLINED
BY ABOUT 15% SINCE THE YEAR
2000.
HOW CAN THAT TREND BE REVERSED?
WELCOME TO SOMETHING KNOWN AS
"SOUNDBOX," HERE IN SAN
FRANCISCO.
KQED'S CY MUSIKER REPORTS.
♪
>> Reporter: MANY WHO COME HERE
TONIGHT MAY NOT KNOW A LOT ABOUT
CLASSICAL MUSIC, BUT THAT'S PART
OF THE EXPERIMENT.
>> SOUNDBOX IS DESIGNED TO
APPEAL TO PEOPLE, MANY OF THEM
YOUNGER PEOPLE WHO NEVER HAVE
ATTENDED MANY CLASSICAL CONCERTS
BEFORE.
♪
>> Reporter: THIS IS A
LABORATORY FOR THE SAN FRANCISCO
SYMPHONY AND MUSIC DIRECTOR
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS, WHO ARE
LOOKING FOR WAYS TO CREATE NEW
MUSICAL EXPERIENCES AND ENTICE
NEW AUDIENCES.
>> SINCE THE 1970s, I'VE BEEN
REALLY INTERESTED IN HOW THE
INSTALLATION OF MUSIC CAN CHANGE
THE AUDIENCE'S PERCEPTION OF IT.
HOW TO BRING PEOPLE WHO ARE
LISTENING TO THE MUSIC MORE
INSIDE THE WORLD THAT WE THE
PERFORMERS ARE EXPERIENCING?
>> Reporter: BY DAY, THE SPACE
IS A CAVERNOUS REHEARSAL HALL.
BY SHOW TIME, LIGHTING, A BAR
AND CUSTOM ACOUSTICS DESIGNED
FOR THE EVENT COMPLETELY
TRANSFORM THE SPACE.
♪
THE MUSICIANS ARE MEMBERS OF THE
SAME ORCHESTRA THAT PERFORMS ON
THE MAIN STAGE OF DAVIES
SYMPHONY HALL, WHERE THEY'VE
HONED THEIR SKILLS PLAYING
CLASSICAL SYMPHONIES.
BUT IN THIS VENUE, THERE ARE
MULTIPLE STAGES AND
OPPORTUNITIES TO BROADEN THE
REPERTOIRE.
>> MUSICALLY, WE DO GET TO DO
DIFFERENT THINGS IN SOUNBOX.
THE PIECE THAT I PLAYED WAS A
VERY ANGULAR, LOUD, RAMBUNCTIOUS
PIECE.
>> Reporter: EACH SET LASTS 20
TO 30 MINUTES, WITH AMPLE
INTERMISSIONS TO MINGLE AND BUY
DRINKS.
AND AT $25, THE PRICE OF ENTRY
HERE IS A FRACTION OF HIGHER-
TIER SYMPHONY SEATS.
>> IT'S A MORE RELAXED
ATMOSPHERE, AND I THINK THAT IS
THE FIRST THING THAT KIND OF
TURNS YOUNGER, MAYBE LESS
EXPOSED PEOPLE OFF THE WHOLE
SYMPHONY EXPERIENCE.
THEY THINK THEY'RE GOING TO COME
IN HERE, AND THEY HAVE TO BE
QUIET AND IT'S STUFFY, AND
EVERYONE IS WEARING A TUXEDO OR
A BALL GOWN, AND YOU CAN'T TALK
AND YOU CAN'T MOVE AND YOU DON'T
KNOW WHEN TO CLAP.
>> Reporter: THE FREE-FLOWING
ATMOSPHERE IS TARGETING A
YOUNGER, MORE DIVERSE AUDIENCE,
BUT THE GOAL IS TO HOOK THEM
INTO SERIOUS MUSIC.
♪
>> IT IS VERY CHALLENGING MUSIC.
I USUALLY TEND TO, WHEN I GO
OUT, GO TO MORE KIND OF EITHER
ROCK-ORIENTED SHOWS, OR HIP HOP
SHOWS, OR KIND OF MORE MODERN
SHOWS.
BUT I FIND THAT IT BLEW MY MIND.
♪
>> Reporter: THE SERIES IS JUST
FOUR MONTHS OLD, AND THE
SYMPHONY HAS MADE SOME UNUSUAL
MARKETING CHOICES LIKE NOT
PUTTING A LINK TO SOUNDBOX ON
ITS HOMEPAGE, SAYS CLASSICAL
MUSIC CRITIC JOSHUA KOSMAN.
>> IT'S A SORT OF AN ANTI-
MARKETING STRATEGY WHERE YOU
KIND OF MAKE SURE NOT TO GIVE
TOO MUCH INFORMATION THAT WILL
BRING IN THE REGULARS AND
SQUEEZE OUT THE NEWCOMERS AND
THE ADVENTURERS.
>> Reporter: KOSMAN SAID THAT
SYMPHONIES NEED TO JUSTIFY THEIR
EXISTENCE IN A LANDSCAPE CROWDED
WITH ENTERTAINMENT OPTIONS.
♪
SAN FRANCISCO SYMPHONY BOARD
PRESIDENT SAKURAKO FISHER ARGUES
THAT SOUNDBOX IS ABOUT MORE THAN
SELLING TICKETS; IT'S ABOUT
STAYING RELEVANT.
>> IT'S NOT A BUSINESS, IT IS
PART OF THE NECESSITY OF THE
HUMAN HEART.
IT'S A PART OF WHAT MAKES A
VIBRANT COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: IF THE CURRENT RUN
OF SOLD-OUT PERFORMANCES MEANS
ANYTHING, SOUNDBOX MAY BE THE
PROTOTYPE FOR THE NEXT ERA IN
CLASSICAL MUSIC.
(APPLAUSE)
THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
"VIEWERS LIKE YOU," YOUR
COMMENTS ABOUT SOME OF OUR
RECENT WORK.
WE HEARD FROM MANY OF YOU ABOUT
LAST SUNDAY'S SIGNATURE PIECE
EXPLORING WHETHER GAMBLING ON
SPORTS EVENTS SHOULD BE
LEGALIZED.
MANY OF YOU TOLD US YOU THINK
IT'S A BAD IDEA.
DONNA WILLIAMS-TERRY WROTE US:
"IT WOULD BE EXTREMELY ADDICTIVE
FOR TOO MANY PEOPLE.
MORE SO THAN REGULAR CASINO
GAMBLING BECAUSE SPORTS IN
ITSELF IS ADDICTIVE."
DIANE ROMAN SAID:
"MAKING IT LEGAL DOESN'T CURE
THE DISEASE."
AND LARRY SCHELLER TOLD US HE'S
SEEN THE HARM GAMBLING CAUSES.
"I KNOW TWO PEOPLE THAT HAVE
MORTGAGED THEIR HOMES AND LOST
THEM DUE TO THEIR GAMBLING
ADDICTION."
NORMANIUM ELDRED SAID:
"GAMBLING IS BASICALLY A TAX ON
THE POOR AND DESPERATE."
KURT REX COOPER WORRIED THERE'D
BE "TOO MUCH OPPORTUNITY FOR
CORRUPTION."
AND WILLIAM GIEGRICH CALLED THE
IDEA "DISGUSTING.
TOTALLY CORRUPTING."
BUT MORE OF YOU THOUGHT STATES
SHOULD TRY TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF
AN ACTIVITY MANY PEOPLE ARE
ENGAGED IN ANYWAY.
ERIK SOMOROFF SAID:
"MAKE IT LEGAL... NOT MY PLACE
TO JUDGE AND I'D RATHER SEE SOME
REVENUE FOR THE STATES COME
IN... AND BE PROPERLY MANAGED OF
COURSE."
JASON MICHAEL O'ROURKE WROTE:
"TAX AND REGULATE.
THOSE THAT WILL GAMBLE WHAT THEY
DON'T HAVE TO LOSE WILL DO IT
ANYWAY.
THE LAW SHOULD NEVER BE DESIGNED
TO PROTECT ONE FROM ONESELF."
ANDREW JONES SAID:
"IT'S LEGAL IN OTHER COUNTRIES
THAT SEEM TO DO OK.
LIKE THE DRUG WAR DRIVING IT
UNDERGROUND JUST MAKES IT HARDER
TO CONTROL IN A REASONABLE
MANNER."
AND FINALLY THIS FROM NATHAN
ENGLE:
"SINCE WE APPARENTLY CAN'T EVEN
INDICT THE WALL STREET GAMBLERS
WHO CRASHED THE GLOBAL ECONOMY
I'M NOT SURE I SEE THE POINT IN
PERSECUTING SPORTS FANS FOR
PUTTING THEIR MONEY WHERE THEIR
MOUTHS ARE."
AS ALWAYS WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS AT pbs.org/newshour, ON
OUR FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET US
@NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT:
ANGIE'S LIST, THE CUSTOMER
REFERRAL WEB SITE, SAYS IT IS
DROPPING PLANS TO EXPAND ITS
OPERATIONS IN INDIANA.
IT JOINS YELP, salesforce.com
AND OTHERS IN PROTEST OF
INDIANA'S PASSAGE OF WHAT'S
KNOWN AS THE RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
ACT.
CRITICS SAY THE NEW LAW WILL
PROMOTE DISCRIMINATION AGAINST
GAYS.
AND WHAT'S KNOWN AS "EARTH
HOUR," FROM 8:30 P.M. TO 9:30
P.M. LOCAL TIME, IS BEING
OBSERVED AROUND THE WORLD.
THE DIMMING OF LIGHTS, LIKE HERE
AT SAINT BASIL'S CATHEDRAL ON
RED SQUARE IN MOSCOW, IS MEANT
TO CALL ATTENTION TO CLIMATE
CHANGE.
THAT'S ALL FOR TONIGHT.
WE'LL BE BACK HERE AT KQED IN
SAN FRANCISCO AGAIN TOMORROW
NIGHT.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.